---
source_url: "https://www.cfr.org/articles/japanese-bid-foreign-bonds-after-end-yield-curve-control"
type: webpage
title: "The Japanese Bid for Foreign Bonds After the End of Yield Curve Control | Council on Foreign Relations"
captured_at: 2026-04-19T15:51:01.469255+00:00
contributor: "unknown"
---

# The Japanese Bid for Foreign Bonds After the End of Yield Curve Control | Council on Foreign Relations

Source: https://www.cfr.org/articles/japanese-bid-foreign-bonds-after-end-yield-curve-control

---

The Japanese Bid for Foreign Bonds After the End of Yield Curve Control | Council on Foreign Relations Skip to content Support CFR Foreign Affairs Member Login Regions Topics Research Experts Events Articles Follow the Money The Japanese Bid for Foreign Bonds After the End of Yield Curve Control Share Follow the Money The Japanese Bid for Foreign Bonds After the End of Yield Curve Control The Bank of Japan (BoJ) is widely expected to end yield curve control. But Japanese yields will remain low, and foreign bonds will remain attractive to those Japanese investors who don’t have to hedge. By experts and staff Published March 18, 2024 8:37 p.m. Experts By Brad W. Setser Whitney Shepardson Senior Fellow Share This is a joint blog post with Alex Etra of Exante Data The Bank of Japan (BoJ) seems set to exit its negative interest rate policy (NIRP) this week and allow its target interest rate to rise to just above zero. It also may also take further gradual steps to allow the yield on 10-year Japanese government bonds (JGBs) to fluctuate more freely, continuing its two-year long process of backing away from yield curve control. Japanese investors own about as many bonds around the world as China’s central bank and its big state banks. Shifts in Japanese monetary policy – even if widely telegraphed – are of global interest. There are always fears that Japanese investors will lose interest in foreign paper. Analysis of Japan’s impact on global markets is oversimplified, however. There is no doubt that the Bank of Japan’s policies have pushed Japanese investors to seek yield around the world. For the eight years before the COVID shock, the Bank of Japan’s purchases were so large that the stock of bonds available for Japanese investors to buy was actually falling – and many Japanese investors had no real choice but to look abroad for yield . And now Japanese yields are poised to increase a bit, creating fear that Japanese investors will start selling foreign bonds and returning home. But the impact of the end of yield curve control also should not be exaggerated. There is also a lot more yield available globally now than there was back in 2014. U.S., Australian, British, Italian, Spanish, and French 10-year government bonds all currently yield considerably more than 10-year JGBs. The famous (in some circles) kink in Japan’s curve that was obvious in March 2023 has largely disappeared. Japanese investors looking for yield no longer are forced to choose between chasing returns abroad or buying ultra-long dated JGBs. So, understanding the likely impact of the BoJ forthcoming tightening requires understanding the Japanese bid for foreign bonds – and that requires understanding, well, a lot of different institutional flows . Japan’s commercial banks, Japanese policy/savings banks ( Post Bank and Norinchukin ), Japanese life insurers and Japan’s big government pension fund all have large foreign bond holdings, which they hold for related but subtly different reasons. The good news? Japan matters, but not in quite the sensational way that some often posit. The potentially imminent end of negative rates and the possibility of higher 10-year JGB yields with the end of yield curve control isn’t going to radically change the incentives that have led Japanese investors to seek yield abroad between 2012 and 2021 – or the incentives that led that flow to reverse in 2022, well ahead of any shift in Japanese policy. Our core thesis is simple: the Japanese bid for foreign bonds is best understood as the convergence of two distinct bids. There is a bid from large, hedged investors: banks, investment trusts managing funds for Post Bank and Norinchukin (Nochu), and the life insurance companies (“lifers”) – sometimes. And there is a separate bid from large, unhedged investors: the Ministry of Finance (MoF), the Government Pension Investment Fund (GPIF), the “private” pension funds, and the lifers – sometimes. The economics of the two trades differ – as do regulations governing the large Japanese institutions that drive the overall Japanese bid for foreign bonds. The resulting tug of war determines net Japanese flows – which don’t always follow directly from changes in the absolute yield on safe Japanese assets. One irony: the bid from private Japanese investors has mostly been a hedged bid; the bulk of the unhedged holdings are in the hands of Japan’s government (counting the MoF’s reserves , which are the largest unhedged holdings of foreign bonds). As a result, the bulk of the losses from hedged investments are in private hands (as those investors have seen the market value of their bonds fall without an offset from the rising yen value of their dollars or euros). See, for example, the large unrealized loss Norinchukin reports on its bond portfolio. Conversely, the big profits from the yen’s move from 100 to 150 have been enjoyed by the MoF and the GPIF. The Hedged Investors The underlying economics of hedged purchases are actually easy, but they aren’t intuitive. A hedged Japanese investor in U.S. bonds is typically borrowing U.S. dollars short-term to buy long-term U.S. Treasuries. The profitability of that trade is clearly a function of the shape of the U.S. curve (it makes sense if the curve is steep, but not if the curve is inverted). In practice, a hedged Japanese investor is paying the difference between short-term Japanese rates and short-term U.S. rates to borrow the dollars with which to purchase long-term U.S. debt. So long as short-term Japanese rates are close to zero (as they have been for decades), the logic of the trade depended in large part on the shape of the U.S. curve. Or to be technically precise, the economics of the trade were driven by the shape of the U.S. curve relative to the shape of the Japanese curve. If, for example, Japanese short-term rates were at zero, U.S. short term rates were 0.5 percent, and U.S. long-term rates were 2.5 percent, a hedged Japanese investor could earn about 200 basis points borrowing dollars (paying the difference between short-term Japanese and U.S. interest rates) and investing in U.S. Treasuries – at a time when 10-year JGBs yielded ~10 basis points and 15-year JGBs yielded ~25 basis points. But now, with short-term U.S. rates of 5.5 percent and long-term U.S. Treasury rates of between 4.0 and 4.5 percent, Japanese investors buying Treasuries unhedged are losing money – and clearly would be better off holding JGBs currently yielding ~75 basis points. Now, sophisticated observers would note two things. First, what really matters for an investment in a 10-year bond that will be held to maturity on a hedged basis isn’t the current difference in short-term interest rates but the expected path of short-term interest rates. For example, a Japanese investor who bought a 10-year Treasury last fall at a 5 percent yield on a currency hedged basis would make money relative to a 10-year JGB if the average U.S. short-term interest rate over the next 10 years is below 4 percent (or to be technically correct, if the difference between U.S. and Japanese short-term rates – net of the extra premium paid to borrow dollars through the swap market – is less than 4 percent on average). Second, a hedged investor can also collect credit and liquidity premium in addition to the spread on theoretically riskless safe assets such as sovereign bonds. A Japanese investor today buying U.S. Agency mortgage-backed securities or U.S. investment-grade corporate bonds can still make around 25 basis points or more on a hedged basis right now – with the prospect of additional returns should U.S. short-term rates fall and/or Japanese short-term rates rise. All this matters because Japanese hedged investors – by all appearances – returned to the U.S. bond market in 2023 (even as 10-year JGB yields moved from less than 25 basis points to 90 basis points). Japanese banks were the first to sell U.S. securities – selling in early 2022, as the Fed started its hiki
